---
layout: project
title: 'Characterizing the evolution of entorhinal cortex in AD patients'
date: 2 Sept 2019
image: /assets/img/projects/geodesic_regression.png
screenshot: /assets/img/projects/geodesic_regression.png
#links:
#  - title: Website
#    url: https://hydecorp.github.io/hy-img/
#  - title: Source
#    url: https://github.com/hydecorp/hy-img
caption: A modified geodesic regression model
description: >
  A modified geodesic model for characterizing a long term evolution of subcortical structures such as entorhinal cortex (ERC)
accent_color: '#4fb1ba'
accent_image:
  background: 'linear-gradient(to bottom,#193747 0%,#233e4c 30%,#3c929e 50%,#d5d5d4 70%,#cdccc8 100%)'
  overlay:    true
---

# Characterizing the evolution of entorhinal cortex in AD patients

## Abstract

Early anatomic change of the entorhinal cortex (ERC) provides us with information about the potential pathological structural deformation due to the Alzheimer’s Disease. To better understand the personalized pathological change in ERC, we first describe a mean deformation trend of ERC over a long period of time as a prior distribution using geodesic regression. Then we modify the basic geodesic regression model to investigate the personalized deviation from the mean deformation trend. The result shows that more atrophy and thickness reduction happen in the ERC in subjects who have mild cognitive impairment than normal population.

## Background

The localized anatomic changes in brain associated with the Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is considered as an indirect measurement of neural damage[1]. In particular, the entorhinal cortex is demonstrated a subcortical structure whose atrophy and thickness show a significant relationship with early pathological deformation in patients developing AD[2]. To investigate the deformation of entorhinal cortex at a preclinical stage, we focus on the patients who have mild cognitive impairment (MCI) then progressing to AD.

Computational anatomy provides a possible approach to compute the deformation quantitatively. Characterization of atrophy in entorhinal cortex can be reflected by smooth longitudinal mapping, which is also known as diffeomorphism. Diffeomorphometry describes the correspondence and changes between time-varying templates under the premise of smoothness[2]. In this project, we fit in the time-varying entorhinal cortex templates using the method of diffeomorphometry.
  
 ## Problems
 
People have been trying for years to find out what is happening in our brain due to aging or due to some specific diseases on the top of aging, such as AD[3]. Linear models used to describe the changes in longitudinal brain templates appear to perform well in a short period of time. However, long-term deformation is considered non-linear and anatomically localized. 

Characterizing the mean evolution of brains at a statistic level can be very valuable for the understanding of outliers which may be caused by diseases. Thus, to draw a mean deformation trend of normal brains and observing the deviation of MCI population will help us identify the pathological changes associated with AD at an early stage. In our project, we are trying to characterize the mean evolution of normal ERC as a prior distribution and find out personalized deviation from the mean to investigate pathological AD-related structural changes.

## Solutions

### Overview
    We describe the deformation of each subject’s time-varying ERC templates as a continuous smooth trajectory passing from the baseline through each follow up templates. Our approach to quantify the deformation is to measure the velocity of the trajectory at each moment. The velocity field generated by a single subject is expected to be 4-dimensional in terms of time and space to adapt to high-dimensional time and regional shape variability. Statistically, we average all subject-dependent velocity fields of normal population according to their birthdays to obtain the mean deformation trend associated with aging. Under the influence of the mean trend, we further identify the deviation of MCI subjects from the mean trend to observe the structural change due to pathology.
